@node ftpd invocation
@chapter @command{ftpd}: FTP daemon
@cindex ftpd

@command{ftpd} is the Internet File Transfer Protocol server process.
The server uses the @acronym{TCP} protocol and listens at the port
specified in the @samp{ftp} service specification; see @ref{Internet
network services list,,, services(5), services(5) man page}.

@example
ftpd [@var{option}]@dots{}
@end example

@table @option

@item -A
@itemx --anonymous-only
@opindex -A
@opindex --anonymous-only
Only anonymous login is allowed.

@item -a @var{auth}
@item --auth=@var{auth}
@opindex -a
@opindex --auth
Specify what authentication mechanism to use for incomming
connections.  Possible values are: @samp{kerberos}, @samp{kerberos5},
@samp{opie} and @samp{default}.

Anonymous logins will continue to work when this option is used.

@item  -D
@itemx --daemon
@opindex --daemon
@opindex -D
@command{ftpd} enters daemon-mode. That allows @command{ftpd} to be
run without @command{inetd}. 

@item -d
@itemx --debug
@opindex -d
@opindex --debug
Debugging information is written to the @code{syslog} using facility @samp{LOG_FTP}.

@item -l
@itemx --logging
@opindex -l
@opindex --logging
Each successful and failed ftp session is logged using @code{syslog}
with a facility of @samp{LOG_FTP}.  If this option is specified twice,
the retrieve (@code{get}), store (@code{put}), append, delete, make directory,
remove directory and rename operations and their filename arguments are
also logged.

@item -p @var{pidfile}
@item --pidfile=@var{pidfile}
@opindex -p
@opindex --pidfile
Change default location of @var{pidfile}

@item -q
@item --no-version
@opindex -q
@opindex --no-version
Quiet mode.  No information about the version of the @command{ftpd} is given
to the client.

@item -T
@item --max-timeout
@opindex -T
@opindex --max-timeout
A client may also request a different timeout period; the maximum
period allowed may be set to timeout seconds with the @option{-T} option.
The default limit is 2 hours.

@item -t @var{timeout}
@item --timeout=@var{timeout}
@opindex -t
@opindex --timeout
The inactivity timeout period is set to timeout seconds (the default is
15 minutes).

@item -u @var{umask}
@item --umask=@var{umask}
@opindex -u
@opindex --umask
Set default umask(base 8).

@end table

The file @file{/etc/nologin} can be used to disable ftp access.  If the file
exists,@command{ ftpd} displays it and exits.  If the file
@file{/etc/ftpwelcome} exists, @command{ftpd} prints it before issuing
the @samp{ready} message.  If the file @command{/etc/motd} exists,
@command{ftpd} prints it after a successful login. 

The @acronym{FTP} server currently supports the following
@acronym{FTP} requests.  The case of the requests is ignored.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.7
@headitem Request  @tab  Description
@item ABOR         @tab  abort previous command
@item ACCT         @tab  specify account (ignored)
@item ALLO         @tab  allocate storage (vacuously)
@item APPE         @tab  append to a file
@item CDUP         @tab  change to parent of current working directory
@item CWD          @tab  change working directory
@item DELE         @tab  delete a file
@item HELP         @tab  give help information
@item LIST         @tab  give list files in a directory (``ls -lgA'')
@item MKD          @tab  make a directory
@item MDTM         @tab  show last modification time of file
@item MODE         @tab  specify data transfer mode
@item NLST         @tab  give name list of files in directory
@item NOOP         @tab  do nothing
@item PASS         @tab  specify password
@item PASV         @tab  prepare for server-to-server transfer
@item PORT         @tab  specify data connection port
@item PWD          @tab  print the current working directory
@item QUIT         @tab  terminate session
@item REST         @tab  restart incomplete transfer
@item RETR         @tab  retrieve a file
@item RMD          @tab  remove a directory
@item RNFR         @tab  specify rename-from file name
@item RNTO         @tab  specify rename-to file name
@item SITE         @tab  non-standard commands (see next section)
@item SIZE         @tab  return size of file
@item STAT         @tab  return status of server
@item STOR         @tab  store a file
@item STOU         @tab  store a file with a unique name
@item STRU         @tab  specify data transfer structure
@item SYST         @tab  show operating system type of server system
@item TYPE         @tab  specify data transfer type
@item USER         @tab  specify user name
@item XCUP         @tab  change to parent of current working directory
(deprecated)
@item XCWD         @tab  change working directory (deprecated)
@item XMKD         @tab  make a directory (deprecated)
@item XPWD         @tab  print the current working directory (deprecated)
@item XRMD         @tab  remove a directory (deprecated)
@end multitable

The following non-standard or @acronym{UNIX} specific commands are
supported by the @code{SITE} request.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.7
@item Request      @tab  Description
@item UMASK        @tab  change umask, e.g. @code{SITE UMASK 002}
@item IDLE         @tab  set idle-timer, e.g. @code{SITE IDLE 60}
@item CHMOD        @tab  change mode of a file, e.g. @code{SITE CHMOD0
0CHMOD1 1CHMOD2}
@item HELP         @tab  give help information.
@end multitable

The remaining @acronym{FTP} requests specified in Internet RFC 959 are
recognized, but not implemented.  @code{MDTM} and @code{SIZE} are not
specified in RFC 959, but will appear in the next updated FTP RFC.

The ftp server will abort an active file transfer only when the
@code{ABOR} command is preceded by a Telnet @samp{Interrupt Process}
(IP) signal and a Telnet @samp{Synch} signal in the command Telnet
stream, as described in Internet RFC 959.  If a @code{STAT} command is
received during a data transfer, preceded by a Telnet IP and Synch,
transfer status will be returned. 

@code{Ftpd} interprets file names according to the globbing conventions used
by csh(1).  This allows users to utilize the metacharacters @samp{*?[]@{@}~}.

@command{Ftpd} authenticates users according to three rules.

@enumerate

@item
The login name must be in the password data base, @file{/etc/passwd},
and not have a null password.  In this case a password must be
provided by the client before any file operations may be performed.

@item
The login name must not appear in the file @file{/etc/ftpusers}.

@item
The user must have a standard shell returned by getusershell(3).

@item
If the user name is @samp{anonymous} or @samp{ftp}, an anonymous ftp
account must be present in the password file (user @samp{ftp}).
In this case the user is allowed to log in by specifying any
password (by convention an email address for the user should
be used as the password).

@end enumerate

In the last case, @command{ftpd} takes special measures to restrict
the client's access privileges.  The server performs a chroot(2) to
the home directory of the @samp{ftp} user.  In order that system
security is not breached, it is recommended that the @samp{ftp}
subtree be constructed with care, following these rules:

@table @file
@item ~ftp
Make the home directory owned by @samp{root} and unwritable by anyone.

@item ~ftp/bin
Make this directory owned by @samp{root} and unwritable by
anyone (mode 555).  The program @command{ls} must be present to
support the list command.  This program should be mode 111.

@item ~ftp/etc
Make this directory owned by @samp{root} and unwritable by
anyone (mode 555).  The files @file{passwd} and @file{group} must
be present for the @command{ls} command to be able to produce owner
names rather than numbers.  The password field in @file{passwd}
is not used, and should not contain real passwords.  The
file @file{motd}, if present, will be printed after a successful
login.  These files should be mode 444.

@item ~ftp/pub
Make this directory mode 777 and owned by @samp{ftp}. Guests
can then place files which are to be accessible via the
anonymous account in this directory.

@end table

@section Configuration files

@table @samp
@item @file{/etc/ftpusers}
List of unwelcome/restricted users.
@item @file{/etc/ftpwelcome}
Welcome notice.
@item @file{/etc/motd}
Welcome notice after login.
@item @file{/etc/nologin}
Displayed and access refused.
@end table
