@node logger invocation
@chapter @command{logger}: Make entries in the system log
@cindex logger

@command{logger} is a program to make entries in the system log files.
It provides a shell command interface to the system log module.
@xref{Syslog, , Syslog, libc, The GNU C Library Reference Manual}, for
details.

The message can contain a priority code, which should be a preceding
decimal number in angle braces, for example, @code{<5>}.  This priority
code should map into the priorities defined in the include file
@code{<sys/syslog.h>}.

@example
logger [@var{option}]@dots{} [@var{message}]
@end example

@table @option
@item -i
@opindex -i
Log the process ID of the logger process with each line.

@item -s
@opindex -s
Log the message to standard error, as well as the system log.  This
option might not be supported on all systems.

@item -f @var{file}
@itemx --file=@var{file}
@opindex -f
@opindex --file
Log the content of the specified file.

@item -p @var{priority}
@itemx --priority=@var{priority}
@opindex -p
@opindex --priority
Enter the message with the specified priority.  The priority may be
specified numerically or as a @samp{facility.level} pair.  For
example, @option{-p local3.info} logs the message at the informational
level in the @samp{local3} facility.  The default is
@samp{user.notice}.

The actual list of supported facilities and levels is system specific.

@item -t @var{tag}
@itemx --tag=@var{tag}
@opindex -t
@opindex --tag
Mark every line in the log with the specified tag.
@end table

The options are followed by the message which should be written to the
log.  If not specified, and the @option{-f} flag is not provided, standard
input is logged.

The logger utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.

The following examples illustrate the usage of the @command{logger}
command:

@example
logger System rebooted

logger -p local0.notice -t HOSTIDM -f /dev/idmc
@end example
