@node rcp invocation
@chapter @command{rcp}: Copy files between machines
@cindex rcp

@command{Rcp} copies files between machines.  Each file or directory
argument is either a remote file name of the form
@samp{rname@@rhost:path}, or a local file name (containing no @samp{:}
characters, or a @samp{/ before} any @samp{:}s).

@example
rcp [@var{option}]@dots{} @var{old-file} @var{new-file}
rcp [@var{option}]@dots{} @var{files}@dots{} @var{directory}
@end example

@table @option
@item -K
@itemx --kerberos
@opindex -K
@opindex --kerberos
Turns off all Kerberos authentication.

@item -k
@itemx --realm=@var{realm}
@opindex -k
@opindex --realm
The option requests rcp to obtain tickets for the remote host in @var{realm}
realm instead of the remote host's realm as determined by krb_realmofhost(3).

@item -p
@itemx --preserve
@opindex -p
@opindex --preserve
Causes @code{rcp} to attempt to preserve (duplicate) in its copies the
modification times and modes of the source files, ignoring the umask.
By default, the mode and owner of file are preserved if it already
existed; otherwise the mode of the source file modified by the
umask(2) on the destination host is used.

@item -r
@itemx --recursive
@opindex -r
@opindex --recursive
If any of the source files are directories, @command{rcp} copies each subtree
rooted at that name; in this case the destination must be a directory.

@item -x
@itemx --encrypt
@opindex -x
@opindex --encrypt
Turns on @acronym{DES} encryption for all data passed via the rcp
session.  This may impact response time and @acronym{CPU} utilization,
but provides increased security.

@end table

@command{Rcp} doesn't detect all cases where the target of a copy
might be a file in cases where only a directory should be legal.

@command{Rcp} can be confused by any output generated by commands in a
@file{.login}, @file{.profile}, or @file{.cshrc} file on the remote host.

The destination user and hostname may have to be specified as
@samp{rhost.rname} when the destination machine is running the 4.2BSD
version of @command{rcp}.
