@node rlogin
@chapter rlogin
@cindex rlogin

@command{Rlogin} command logs into a specified remote host and connects your
local terminal to the remote host.  The remote terminal type is the same as
that given in the @env{TERM} local environment variable.  The terminal or
window size is also the same, if the remote host supports them, and any
changes in size are transferred.

When using the @command{rlogin} command, you can create a link to your path
using a host name as the link name. For example:

@example
#
# ln -s /usr/bin/rlogin HostName
# Hostname -8
@end example

Using @var{HostName} automatically uses the @command{rlogin} to log in to
the remote host named @var{HostName}.

@command{Rlogin} allows access to the remote host without the use of a passwd.
For details, @xref{rcmd, , rcmd, libc, The GNU C Library Reference Manual}.

@section Invoking

The options are as follows :

@table @option
@item -8
@itemx --8-bit
@opindex -8
@opindex --8-bit
Allows an eight-bit input data path at all times; otherwise parity bits are
stripped except when the remote side's stop and start characters are other
than @kbd{C-S}/@kbd{C-Q}.

@item -E
@item --no-escape
@itemx --no-escape
@opindex -E
@opindex --no-escape
Stops any character from being recognized as an escape character.  When used
with the @option{-8} option, this provides a completely transparent connection.

@item -K
@itemx --kerberos
@opindex -K
@opindex --kerberos
Turns off all Kerberos authentication.

@item -d
@itemx --debug
@opindex -d
@opindex --debug
Turns on socket debugging (@pxref{set options on sockets,,,setsockopt(2),
setsockopt(2) man page}) on the @acronym{TCP} sockets used for
communication with the remote host.

@item -e
@itemx --escape=@var{char}
@opindex -e
@opindex --escape
Allows user specification of the escape character, which is @samp{~}
by default.  This specification may be as a literal character, or as
an octal value in the form @samp{\nnn}.

@item -k
@itemx --realm=@var{realm}
@opindex -k
@opindex --realm
The option requests rlogin to obtain tickets for the remote host in @var{realm}
realm instead of the remote host's realm as determined by krb_realmofhost(3).

@item -x
@itemx --encrypt
@opindex -x
@opindex --encrypt
Turns on @acronym{DES} encryption for all data passed via the rlogin
session.  This may impact response time and @acronym{CPU} utilization,
but provides increased security. 

@end table

A line of the form @kbd{@var{escape-char}.} disconnects from the remote host.
Similarly, the line @kbd{@var{escape-char}C-Z} will suspend the
rlogin session, and @kbd{@var{escape-char}@var{delayed-suspend-char}}
suspends the send portion of the @command{rlogin}, but allows output
from the remote system.  By default, the tilde (@samp{~) character} is
the @var{escape-char}, and normally @kbd{C-Y} is the
@var{delayed-suspend-char}. 

All echoing takes place at the remote site, so that (except for delays)
the @command{rlogin} is transparent.  Flow control via
@kbd{C-S}/@kbd{C-Q}, if supported, stop and start the flow of
information, flushing of input and output on interrupts are handled properly.

On the server side the @code{iruserok} and @code{ruserok} functions are used to
authenticate, see the appropriate man page for more information, if supported.

@section Kerberos Authentication

If @command{rlogin} was compiled with kerberos support, options
@option{-x}, @option{-k}, @option{-K} are available.  Each user may
have a private authorization list in the file @file{.klogin} in their
home directory.  Each line in this file should contain a Kerberos
principal name of the form @samp{principal.instance@@realm}. If the
originating user is authenticated to one of the principals named in
@file{.klogin}, access is granted to the account.  The principal
@samp{accountname.@@localrealm} is granted access if there is no
@file{.klogin} file.  Otherwise a login and password will be prompted
for on the remote machine as in login(1).  To avoid certain security
problems, the @file{.klogin} file must be owned by the remote user. 
If Kerberos authentication fails, a warning message is printed and the
standard Berkeley rlogin is used instead.
