@node rsh
@chapter rsh
@cindex rsh

@command{Rsh} executes command on host and copies its standard input to the
remote command, the standard output of the remote command to its standard
output, and the standard error of the remote command to its standard error.
Interrupt, quit and terminate signals are propagated to the remote command;
@command{rsh} normally terminates when the remote command does.

When using the @command{rsh} command, you can create a link to your path
using a host name as the link name. For example:

@example
#
# ln -s /usr/bin/rsh HostName
# Hostname ls

@end example

@var{HostName} will be passed to @command{rsh} as the default host.

@command{Rsh} allows access to the remote host without the use of a passwd.
For details, @xref{rcmd, , rcmd, libc, The GNU C Library Reference Manual}.

@section Invoking

The options are as follows :

@table @option

@item -K
@itemx --kerberos
@opindex -K
@opindex --kerberos
Turns off all Kerberos authentication.

@item -d
@itemx --debug
@opindex -d
@opindex --debug
Turns on socket debugging (@pxref{set options on sockets,,,setsockopt(2),
setsockopt(2) man page})  on the TCP sockets used for communication
with the remote host. 

@item -k @var{realm}
@itemx --realm=@var{realm}
@opindex -k
@opindex --realm
The option requests rsh to obtain tickets for the remote host in @var{realm}
realm instead of the remote host's realm as determined by krb_realmofhost(3).

@item -x
@itemx --encrypt
@opindex -x
@opindex --encrypt
Turns on @acronym{DES} encryption for all data passed via the rsh
session.  This may impact response time and @acronym{CPU} utilization,
but provides increased security. 

@item -l
@itemx --user
@opindex -l
@opindex --user
By default, the remote username is the same as the local username.
The @option{-l} option or the @samp{username@@host} format allow the
remote name to be specified.  Kerberos authentication is used, and
authorization is determined as in @command{rlogin} (@pxref{rlogin}).

@end table

If no command is specified, you will be logged in on the remote host using
@command{rlogin}.

Shell metacharacters which are not quoted are interpreted on local machine,
while quoted metacharacters are interpreted on the remote machine.

For example, the command

@example
# rsh otherhost cat remotefile >> localfile
@end example

@noindent
appends the remote file @file{remotefile} to the local file
@file{localfile}, while 

@example
# rsh otherhost cat remotefile ">>" other_remotefile
@end example

@noindent
appends @file{remotefile} to @file{other_remotefile}.

