@node talkd invocation
@chapter @command{talkd}: a server for communication between users
@cindex talkd

@command{Talkd} is the server that notifies a user that someone else
wants to initiate a conversation.  It acts as a repository of
invitations, responding to requests by clients wishing to rendezvous
to hold a conversation.

@example
talkd [@var{option}]@dots{}
@end example

@table @option
@item -a @var{file}
@itemx --acl=@var{file}
@opindex -a
@opindex --acl
Read site-wide @acronym{ACL}s from @var{file}.

@item -d
@item --debug
@opindex --debug
@opindex --d
Enable debugging.

@item -i @var{seconds}
@itemx --idle-timeout=@var{seconds}
@opindex -i
@opindex --idle-timeout
Set idle timeout value.

@item -r @var{seconds}
@itemx --request-ttl=@var{seconds}
@opindex -r
@opindex --request-ttl
Set request time-to-live value.


@item -t @var{seconds}
@item --timeout=@var{seconds}
@opindex -t
@opindex --timeout
Set timeout value.

@end table

In normal operation, a client, the caller, initiates a rendezvous by
sending a @code{CTL_MSG} to the server of type @samp{LOOK_UP} (see
@file{protocols/talkd.h}). This causes the server to search its invitation
tables to check if an invitation currently exists for the caller (to
speak to the callee specified in the message).  If the lookup fails,
the caller then sends an @samp{ANNOUNCE} message causing the server to
broadcast an announcement on the callee's login ports requesting
contact.  When the callee responds, the local server uses the recorded
invitation to respond with the appropriate rendezvous address and the
caller and callee client programs establish a stream connection
through which the conversation takes place.
