@node tftp invocation
@chapter @command{tftp}: TFTP client
@cindex tftp

@command{Tftp} is the user interface to the Internet @acronym{TFTP} (Trivial
File Transfer Protocol), which allows users to transfer files to and
from a remote machine.  The remote host may be specified on the
command line, in which case tftp uses host as the default host for
future transfers (see the connect command below).

@example
tftp [@var{option}]@dots{} @var{host}
@end example


@section Commands

Once tftp is running, it issues the prompt and recognizes the following
commands:

@table @code

@item ? @var{command-name}
Print help information.

@item ascii
Shorthand for @code{mode ascii}

@item binary
Shorthand for @code{mode binary}

@item connect @var{host-name} [@var{port}]
Set the host (and optionally port) for transfers.  Note that the
@acronym{TFTP} protocol, unlike the @acronym{FTP} protocol, does not
maintain connections between transfers; thus, the connect command does not
actually create a connection, but merely remembers what host is
to be used for transfers.  You do not have to use the connect
command; the remote host can be specified as part of the get or
put commands.

@item get @var{file-name}
@itemx get @var{remotename} @var{localname}
@itemx get @var{file}@dots{}
Get a file or set of files from the specified sources. Source can be
in one of two forms: a filename on the remote host, if the host has
already been specified, or a string of the form @samp{hosts:filename} to
specify both a host and filename at the same time.  If the latter form
is used, the last hostname specified becomes the default for future
transfers.

@item mode @var{transfer-mode}
Set the mode for transfers; @var{transfer-mode} may be one of @samp{ascii} or
@samp{binary}. The default is @samp{ascii}.

@item put @var{file}
@itemx put @var{localfile} @var{remotefile}
@itemx put @var{file}@dots{} @var{remote-directory}
Put a file or set of files to the specified remote file or directory.
The destination can be in one of two forms: a filename on the remote
host, if the host has already been specified, or a string of the form
@samp{hosts:filename} to specify both a host and filename at the same time.
If the latter form is used, the hostname specified becomes the default
for future transfers.  If the @file{remote-directory} form is used, the
remote host is assumed to be a @acronym{UNIX} machine.

@item quit
Exit @command{tftp}. An end of file also exits.

@item rexmt @var{retransmission-timeout}
Set the per-packet retransmission timeout, in seconds.

@item status
Show current status.

@item timeout @var{total-transmission-timeout}
Set the total transmission timeout, in seconds.

@item trace
Toggle packet tracing.

@item verbose
Toggle verbose mode.

@end table

Because there is no user-login or validation within the @command{TFTP}
protocol, the remote site will probably have some sort of file-access
restrictions in place.  The exact methods are specific to each site
and therefore difficult to document here.
